---
authors: phisch
tags: [releases]
---

# Caesar 2.2: Timeout Handling, Recursion Checks, Improved Model Checking, and More

The *Caesar 2.2* is an incremental release that adds various improvements to existing features and fixes some bugs.

**Overview:**

   1. [UI Improvements](./2025-05-23-caesar-2-2.md#ui-improvements)
   2. [Guardrail Against Unsound Recursion](./2025-05-23-caesar-2-2.md#guardrail-against-unsound-recursion)
   3. [Better Model Checking Support](./2025-05-23-caesar-2-2.md#model-checking)
   4. [AST Rule Improvements](./2025-05-23-caesar-2-2.md#ast-rule)
   5. [Other Changes](./2025-05-23-caesar-2-2.md#other-changes)

<!-- truncate -->


## UI Improvements {#ui-improvements}

We have improved Caesar's LSP server and the Visual Studio Code extension.

* The extension now properly handles Caesar timeouts.
* Gutter icons are now shown for more verification statuses (todo, ongoing, timeout).

On the command-line:
* Caesar now supports the `--filter [<filter>]` command-line argument to filter the (co)procs that are to be verified or translated for model checking.

## Guardrail Against Unsound Recursion {#guardrail-against-unsound-recursion}

We have added a new check to prevent unsound recursion in the [calculus annotations](/docs/proof-rules/calculi) feature.
This check ensures that users do not accidentally invoke Park induction in an unsound way in the presence of recursive (co)procedures.
It is based on a call graph analysis of the program and over-approximates potential recursion.

## Better Model Checking Support {#model-checking}

Caesar's support for [model checking](/docs/caesar/model-checking) has been greatly improved in this release.
First of all, it gained a new subcommand `caesar mc` to run the model checker on a given HeyVL file.

Many bugs have been fixed and improvements have been made to the model checking support:
 * Correct extraction of preconditions from `coproc`s.
 * Support non-integer rewards.
 * Support for different behaviours of uninitialized variables in the translation has been added.
 * Support for translation of more verification statements (specific forms of `assume`, `assert`) has been added.
 * Only required function definitions are now included in the translation.
 * Caesar now supports directly invoking the Storm model checker via either an installed binary or by using a Docker image.
 * Input variables can be translated as variables or as constants now.

## AST Rule Improvements {#ast-rule}

We have updated the ["New Proof Rule for AST"](/docs/caesar/proof-rules/ast#new-proof-rule) to be more general, allowing verification of AST for more programs.
This is a result of a combination of different formulations in the literature, our own theoretical improvements, as well as internal code improvements for the implementation.

We have added [new documentation](/docs/caesar/proof-rules/ast) for general AST proofs and for this specific AST proof rule in particular.

## Other Changes {#other-changes}

* Documentation has been improved in many places.
* Caesar now supports Z3's probes to determine theoretical complexities of verification tasks.

Many internal improvements to the slicing algorithms have been made.
 * Improved robustness against Z3's incremental mode instabilities.
 * Fixed the `sus` algorithm not finding optimal slices with non-extensive statements.
 * Clarified minimality guarantees of the different algorithms.

Internal:
 * Caesar's test files have been updated to consistenly use the built-in proof rules instead using the old Python-generated HeyVL encodings.
 * Caesar has been updated to compile with latest versions of backwards-incompatible C++ compilers and new versions of CMake.



