---
authors: phisch
tags: [releases]
---

# Caesar 2.1: UI Improvements, More Guardrails, and Improvements to Slicing

The *Caesar 2.1* release adds contains various improvements to existing features and fixes some bugs.

**Overview:**

 1. [UI and Documentation Improvements](./2025-01-17-caesar-2-1.md#ui-and-docs)
 2. [More Guardrails](./2025-01-17-caesar-2-1.md#more-guardrails)
 3. [Slicing Improvements](./2025-01-17-caesar-2-1.md#improvements-to-slicing)
 4. [Minor Fixes](./2025-01-17-caesar-2-1.md#minor-fixes)

<!-- truncate -->

## UI and Documentation Improvements {#ui-and-docs}

We have improved Caesar's UI, especially the Visual Studio Code extension.
Thanks to PRs [#48](https://github.com/moves-rwth/caesar/pull/48) and [#60](https://github.com/moves-rwth/caesar/pull/60):

 * We now properly support verification with multiple open HeyVL files (before, the extension only remembered the latest verification task). This includes error messages and warnings.
 * We improved the wording in the status bar to more accurately reflect the verification status.
 * Proper handling of "unknown" results from the SMT solver.
 * The tooltip menu on the status bar is much more dynamic and supports more features depending on verification results.

[PR #59](https://github.com/moves-rwth/caesar/pull/59) added verification condition explanations for the `@unroll` proof rule.

Additionally:

 * We now automatically start the Caesar LSP server if a HeyVL file is opened.
 * The default timeout for Caesar in VS Code is now 60 seconds (previously it was 300 seconds).
 * The documentation for various features of Caesar has been improved with notes about some relevant theoretical aspects.


## More Guardrails

Caesar now prevents accidental unsound verification through more "guardrails".
This extends the soundness checks from [calculus annotations](/docs/proof-rules/calculi) feature introduced in the last release.
Thanks to [PR #42](https://github.com/moves-rwth/caesar/pull/42):

 * We now check that procedures only call other procedures with the same calculus annotations.
    * If either the caller or callee has no calculus annotation, we do not currently warn the user.
 * We now check that `proc`s are only called inside `proc`s (and analogously for `coproc`s).
 * Various other checks for proof rule annotations have been improved.


## Improvements to Slicing

We have been hard at work to complete and further improve [Caesar's slicing support](/docs/caesar/slicing).

 * We now support slicing probabilistic choices via the command-line flag `--slice-sampling`.
    * This is disabled by default because we have observed negative performance effects for relatively little gain in the average case.
 * Caesar now uses irrelevancy information from the SMT solver to speed up the slice search.
 * Caesar no longer highlights the entire procedure if it does not have a `pre` when slicing for verification.
 * We now properly slice demonic and angelic choices.

We added additional slicing backends to slice verifying programs:

 * A slicing backend on unsatisfiable cores was added (`core`). It is very fast, but does not report optimal slices in many cases.
    * This backend is now the default when slicing verifying programs.
 * We implemented minimal unsat core enumeration to support finding the locally or globally smallest slices (`mus` and `sus` backends).
 * The old `exists-forall` backend still exists, but is not recommended for the general use case because it does not support reasoning with uninterpreted functions.


## Command-Line Interface

Caesar's command-line interface has been redesigned.
The binary now accepts different sub-commands to enable different tasks.

 * The new `verify` command includes all behavior of the previous Caesar CLI interface.
   * If no sub-command is specified, this command will be used. Therefore, the command-line interface is backwards-compatible.
 * The `to-jani` command can be used to only convert HeyVL files to JANI files without running Caesar's checks or verification.
 * The `shell-completions` command can be used to generate code for shell completions for the `caesar` binary.

Furthermore:

 * Caesar's `--help` output is now much more organized and helpful.
 * A new `--no-verify` option can be used to skip the final SMT check. This is useful in conjunction with either `--print-smt` or `--smt-dir` options.
 * The `--print-smt` and `--smt-dir` flags will now emit the SMT-LIB code *before* the final SMT call happens to avoid no output on timeouts.


## Minor Fixes

We have also fixed minor issues, for example:

 * Proper error reporting when using the `@k_induction` proof rule with the invalid parameter `k = 0`.
 * The `--smt-dir` flag now works properly on Windows.
 * Fixed syntax highlighting of block comments in VS Code.
